Warp readme (#1780)
ava-labs/avalanchego: vms/platformvm/warp/README.md

                       +---------------------------+
```

- `signers` encodes a bitset of which validators' signatures are included (a bitset is a byte array where each bit indicates membership of the element at that index in the set)
- `signature` is an aggregated BLS Multi-Signature of the Unsigned Message

BitSetSignatures are verified within the context of a specific P-Chain height. At a specific P-Chain height, the PlatformVM serves a canonically ordered validator set for the source subnet (validator set is ordered lexicographically by the BLS public key bytes). The signers bitset encodes which validators' signature was included. A value of 1 at index i in `signers` claims that a signature from the validator at index i in the canonical validator set is included in the aggregate signature.

The bitset tells the verifier which BLS public keys should be aggregated to verify the warp message.

Signed Message:
```
+------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| unsigned_message :  UnsignedMessage |                          size(unsigned_message) |
+------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------+

> |        signature :        Signature |                                 size(signature) |

Author: Would you prefer the typeID in the `BitSetSignature` type or only within the `SignedMessage` ?

5. Verify the aggregate signature of the unsigned message against the aggregate public key

Once a message is verified, it is left to the VM to define the semantics of delivering a verified message.

## Design Considerations

### Processing Historical Avalanche Warp Messages

Verifying an Avalanche Warp Message requires a lookup of validator sets at a specific P-Chain height. The P-Chain serves lookups by maintaining reverse diffs that can be iterated in order to re-create the validator set of any Subnet at a specific height.

As a chain moves forward, the number of reverse diffs that need to be computed in order to look up the validator set needed to verify an Avalanche Warp Messages increases over time.

Therefore, in order to support verifying historical Avalanche Warp Messages, VMs should provide a heuristic to determine whether an Avalanche Warp Message was treated as valid or invalid within a historical block.

When nodes bootstrap in the future, they bootstrap blocks that have already been marked as accepted by the network, so they can assume the block was verified by the validators of the network when it was first accepted.

> Therefore, the new bootstrapping node can use a heuristic encoded in the block to determine whether an Avalanche Warp Message should be treated as valid / invalid within the execution of that block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, the new bootstrapping node can assume the block was valid to determine whether an Avalanche Warp Message should be treated as valid / invalid within the execution of that block.
```

> Two strategies to provide that heuristic are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two strategies to provide that mechanism are:
```

> - Encode the warp message as a predicate for transaction inclusion. If the transaction is included, the warp message must have passed verification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Require warp message validity for transaction inclusion. If the transaction is included, the warp message must have passed verification.
```

# Avalanche Warp Messaging

> Avalanche Warp Messaging (AWM) provides a primitive for Cross-Subnet Communication on the Avalanche Network.

Reviewer 2: I think `Cross-Subnet Communication` should only be capitalized if it's a term that we'll be using a lot going forward and we want it to the name of a thing rather than an idea, if that makes sense.

Reviewer 2: I think this should be `cross-subnet communication` since it's an idea rather than the thing that does it (Avalanche Warp Messaging.) Similarly I think `Warp Message` should be `Warp message` or `cross-subnet message`.

Author: Updating to `cross-subnet communication` and `warp message` except for where it's used as `Avalanche Warp Message`

> The Avalanche P-Chain provides an index of every Subnet's validator set on the Avalanche Network including a BLS Public Key registered to validators (as of the [Banff Upgrade](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/releases/v1.9.0)). AWM utilizes the weighted validator sets stored on the P-Chain to build a Cross-Subnet Communication Protocol between any two Subnets on the Avalanche Network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Avalanche P-Chain provides an index of every Subnet's validator set on the Avalanche Network, including the BLS Public Key of each validator (as of the [Banff Upgrade](https://github.com/ava-labs/avalanchego/releases/v1.9.0)). AWM utilizes the weighted validator sets stored on the P-Chain to build a Cross-Subnet Communication Protocol between any two Subnets on the Avalanche Network.
```

Reviewer 2: Same question about "Cross-Subnet Communication"

Author: Lower-casing

> Any Virtual Machine (VM) on Avalanche, can integrate Avalanche Warp Messaging to send and receive verifiable messages across Avalanche Subnets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any Virtual Machine (VM) on Avalanche can integrate Avalanche Warp Messaging to send and receive verifiable messages across Avalanche Subnets.
```

We should either define "verifiable" or remove it. I don't think it's necessary if there's no further discussion here of what "verifiable" is.

## Background

This README assumes familiarity with:

- Avalanche P-Chain / [PlatformVM](../)
- [ProposerVM](../../proposervm/README.md)
- Basic familiarity with [BLS Multi-Signatures](https://crypto.stanford.edu/~dabo/pubs/papers/BLSmultisig.html)

## BLS Multi-Signatures with Public-Key Aggregation

> Avalanche Warp Messaging utilizes BLS Multi-Signatures with Public-Key Aggregation in order to verify messages signed by another Subnet. To accomplish this, when a validator is added to the Avalanche P-Chain, it registers a BLS Public-Key to its NodeID along with a Proof of Possession of the corresponding private key to defend against a [rogue public-key attack](https://crypto.stanford.edu/~dabo/pubs/papers/BLSmultisig.html#mjx-eqn-eqaggsame).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Avalanche Warp Messaging utilizes BLS multi-signatures with public key aggregation in order to verify messages signed by another Subnet. When a validator joins a Subnet, the P-Chain records the validator's BLS public Key and NodeID, as well as a proof of possession of the validator's BLS private key to defend against [rogue public-key attacks](https://crypto.stanford.edu/~dabo/pubs/papers/BLSmultisig.html#mjx-eqn-eqaggsame).
```

> AWM utilizes the weighted validator sets registered BLS Public Keys to each validator to provide a weighted set of BLS Public Keys to verify a messaage coming from any Subnet with Warp Messaging.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the weight and BLS public key data, AWM verifies messages coming from any Subnet with Warp Messaging.
```

Author: Updating to "AWM utilizes the weighted validator sets registered BLS public keys verify that an aggregate signature has sufficient weight signing the message from the source Subnet."

BLS provides a way to aggregate signatures off chain into a single signature that can be efficiently verified on chain.

> ## AWM Serialization

Reviewer 3: For this section we're making our own table diagrams but markdown supports this via https://www.markdownguide.org/extended-syntax/#tables

I'm not sure if you meant to do this if you prefer the ASCII look but this is something else to consider

Author: This is following the style we've used here: https://docs.avax.network/reference/avalanchego/p-chain/txn-format. Happy to change it to a more standard format throughout our docs, but don't think that should be a requirement for this PR.

Unsigned Message:
```
+-----------------+----------+--------------------------+
|      network_id :  uint32  |                 4 bytes  |
+-----------------+----------+--------------------------+
| source_chain_id : [32]byte |                32 bytes  |
+-----------------+----------+--------------------------+

> |         payload :   []byte |       4 + size(payload)  |

Reviewer 3: 4 bytes + size(payload) here?

Author: the length is encoded as uint32 followed by the payload

+-----------------+----------+--------------------------+

>                              |  38 + size(payload) bytes|

Reviewer 3: 1. Whatever we choose for the above we should do here to make it consistent
2. What is this? Some header? I currently understand this to be a total, in which case i think this should actually be `4 + 32 + 4 = 36 + size(payload) bytes`.

Author: This was incorrect, updating

+-----------------+----------+--------------------------+
                             |  38 + size(payload) bytes|
                             +--------------------------+
```

- `networkID` provides replay protection for BLS Signers across different Avalanche Networks

> - `sourceChainID` ensures that each blockchain on Avalanche can only sign a message with its own `blockchainID`

Reviewer 2: We should describe what these are in addition to what they do/how they're used

Author: Adding a "what" before the "why`

> - `sourceChainID` is the `blockchainID` of the blockchain sending a message. This ensures that each blockchain can only sign a message with its own `blockchainID`. Note: the `blockchainID` is the hash of the transaction that created the blockchain on the Avalanche P-Chain. It serves as the unique identifier for the blockchain across the Avalanche Network.

Reviewer 3: Wondering if we should remove `blockchainID` since it's not a part of the serialization message format diagram
```suggestion
- `sourceChainID` is the hash of the transaction that created the blockchain on the Avalanche P-Chain. It serves as the unique identifier for the blockchain across the Avalanche Network so that each blockchain can only sign a message with its own id.
```

Reviewer: Honestly - I really question the need to define every term in every readme... `blockchainID` is super common place in avalanche... I don't think we need say how it is created in the warp readme (and if we do want to define it... the definition should be a footnote)

Author: This was a request from a prior review comment. I don't have a strong opinion, but we do get questions about what a `blockchainID` is frequently. I'd suggest that instead of changing this as part of this PR, if we want to stop defining terms everywhere we should define a glossary of common terms in Avalanche that people should know. For example, we are trying to follow the style guide here https://documentation.divio.com/introduction/ in our docs re-write to make the purpose of a specific piece of documentation explicit so that we don't need to try and do everything in one place.

> - `sourceChainID` is the `blockchainID` of the blockchain sending a message. This ensures that each blockchain can only sign a message with its own `blockchainID`. Note: the `blockchainID` is the hash of the transaction that created the blockchain on the Avalanche P-Chain. It serves as the unique identifier for the blockchain across the Avalanche Network.

Reviewer 3: source_chain_id and network_id to be consistent with the diagram

Reviewer: see prior comment

> - `payload` is a byte array containing the contents of the message. VMs can define their own message types to include in the `payload`

Reviewer 2: We should be consistent about camelcase vs snake case

Author: I followed the example here of using snake case inside of the serialization part and camel case when referring to the variable/type outside of that.

BitSetSignature:

> ```

Reviewer 3: Might be good to have a header on these tables to indicate what each column means (i.e field, type, size)

Author: Same comment as above

> Note: the `blockchainID` is the hash of the transaction that created the blockchain on the Avalanche P-Chain. It serves as the unique identifier for the blockchain across the Avalanche Network.

Reviewer 2: We should move this above to:

```
`networkID` provides replay protection for BLS Signers across different Avalanche Networks
```

Author: Where do you want this moved to? This is already in the description of the `networkID` field

> BitSet Signature:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bitset Signature:
```

I don't think bitset should be camel cased

Author: Updated to use either `bitset` or `BitSetSignature` when referring to the type

> BitSetSignature:

Reviewer 4: Not sure if the term BitSet is the standard for this kind of data model, but that confused me at first. I did get it after reading the paragraph, but I think that BitSet does not really describes it well. Afterall everything is a set of bit.

Off the top of my head:
- ValidatorSubsetSignature
- AggregatedValidatorSignature

Author: Hmm bitset is a standard data structure. Now that you've read through it, what would you recommend adding to clarify it here?

A bitset is a byte array where each bit indicates whether or not an element at that index is included in the set.

+-----------+----------+---------------------------+
|   signers :   []byte |          4 + len(signers) |
+-----------+----------+---------------------------+
| signature : [96]byte |                  96 bytes |
+-----------+----------+---------------------------+
                       | 104 + size(signers) bytes |
                       +---------------------------+
```

> - `typeID` is the ID of this signature type, which is `0x00000000`

Reviewer 3: To be consistent with the diagram
```suggestion
- `type_id` is the ID of this signature type, which is `0x00000000`
```

> - `signers` encodes a BitSet of which validators' signatures are included

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `signers` encodes a bitset of which validators' signatures are included
```

Reviewer 2: Should we specify how? i.e. what does each bit in the bitset mean?

Author: This is specified below

- `signature` is an aggregated BLS Multi-Signature of the Unsigned Message

> BitSet Signatures are verified within the context of a specific P-Chain height. At a specific P-Chain height, the PlatformVM serves a canonically ordered validator set for the source subnet. The signers BitSet encodes which validators' signature was included. A 1 at index i in `signers` claims that a signature from the validator at index i in the canonical validator set is included in the aggregate signature.

Reviewer 2: I think we should move these definitions of `signers` and `signature` to their declarations above

Reviewer 2: `A 1 at index i in `signers` claims that a signature from the validator at index i in the canonical validator set is included in the aggregate signature.`

We should define how "canonical" is determined

Author: Generally, I prefer a short description of the variable and then an elaboration of how it's used below.

> The BitSet tells the verifier which BLS Public Keys should be aggregated to verify the Warp Message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The bitset tells the verifier which BLS public keys should be aggregated to verify the Warp Message.
```

> BitSetSignatures are verified within the context of a specific P-Chain height. At a specific P-Chain height, the PlatformVM serves a canonically ordered validator set for the source subnet (validator set is ordered lexicographically by the BLS public key bytes). The signers bitset encodes which validators' signature was included. A 1 at index i in `signers` claims that a signature from the validator at index i in the canonical validator set is included in the aggregate signature.

Reviewer 5: Had to reread the last sentence a couple of times to understand.

```suggestion
BitSetSignatures are verified within the context of a specific P-Chain height. At a specific P-Chain height, the PlatformVM serves a canonically ordered validator set for the source subnet (validator set is ordered lexicographically by the BLS public key bytes). The signers bitset encodes which validators' signature was included. A value of 1 at index i in `signers` claims that a signature from the validator at index i in the canonical validator set is included in the aggregate signature.
```

> BitSetSignatures are verified within the context of a specific P-Chain height. At a specific P-Chain height, the PlatformVM serves a canonically ordered validator set for the source subnet (validator set is ordered lexicographically by the BLS public key bytes). The signers bitset encodes which validators' signature was included. A value of 1 at index i in `signers` claims that a signature from the validator at index i in the canonical validator set is included in the aggregate signature.

Reviewer 3: Minor grammar/formatting nits

```suggestion
BitSetSignatures are verified within the context of a specific P-Chain height. At any given P-Chain height, the PlatformVM serves a canonically ordered validator set for the source subnet (validator set is ordered lexicographically by the BLS public key's byte representation). The `signers` bitset encodes which validator signatures were included. A value of `1` at index `i` in `signers` bitset indicates that a corresponding signature from the same validator at index `i` in the canonical validator set was included in the aggregate signature.
```

Signed Message:
```
+------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| unsigned_message :  UnsignedMessage |                          size(unsigned_message) |
+------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
|        signature :        Signature |                                 size(signature) |
+------------------+------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
                                      |  size(unsigned_message) + size(signature) bytes |
                                      +-------------------------------------------------+
```

## Sending an Avalanche Warp Message

> A Blockchain on Avalanche sends an Avalanche Warp Message by coming to agreement on the message that every validator should be willing to sign. As an example, the VM of a Blockchain may define that once a block is accepted, the VM should be willing to sign a message including the block hash in the payload to attest to any other Subnet that the block was accepted. The contents of the payload, how to aggregate the signature (VM-to-VM communication, off-chain relayer, etc.), is left to the VM.

Reviewer 3: I don't have a preference but we should be consistent about capitalizing blockchain or Blockchain. I think we use lowercase in earlier parts of the doc

Once the validator set of a blockchain is willing to sign the message M, an aggregator performs the following process:

1. Gather signatures of the message M from N validators (assume N validators meets the required threshold of stake on the destination chain)
2. Aggregate the N signatures into a multi-signature

> 3. Look up the canonical validator set at the P-Chain height where the message will be verified

Reviewer 2: Same as above about defining "canonical"

Author: Defining once the first place where `canonical` is used

> 4. Encode the selection of N validators included in the signature out of the canonical validator set as a BitSet

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Encode the selection of the N validators included in the signature in a bitset
```

> 5. Construct the Signed Message with the aggregate signature, BitSet, and the Unsigned Message

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Construct the Signed Message from the the aggregate signature, bitset, and unsigned message
```

> Once the validator set of a blockchain is willing to sign the message M, an aggregator performs the following process:
> 
> 1. Gather signatures of the message M from N validators (where the N validators meet the required threshold of stake on the destination chain)
> 2. Aggregate the N signatures into a multi-signature
> 3. Look up the canonical validator set at the P-Chain height where the message will be verified
> 4. Encode the selection of the N validators included in the signature in a bitset
> 5. Construct the Signed Message from the aggregate signature, bitset, and unsigned message

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once the validator set of a blockchain is willing to sign an arbitrary message `M`, an aggregator performs the following process:

1. Gather signatures of the message `M` from `N` validators (where the `N` validators meet the required threshold of stake on the destination chain)
2. Aggregate the `N` signatures into a multi-signature
3. Look up the canonical validator set at the P-Chain height where the message will be verified
4. Encode the selection of the `N` validators included in the signature in a bitset
5. Construct the signed message from the aggregate signature, bitset, and original unsigned message
```

## Verifying / Receiving an Avalanche Warp Message

Avalanache Warp Messages are verified within the context of a specific P-Chain height included in the [ProposerVM](../../proposervm/README.md)'s header. The P-Chain height is provided as context to the wrapped VM when verifying the VM's internal blocks (implemented by the optional interface [WithVerifyContext](../../../snow/engine/snowman/block/block_context_vm.go)).

> To verify the message, the VM utilizes this Warp package to perform the following steps:

Reviewer 4: Looking at the code, I assume the wrapped VM is doing this:

```suggestion
To verify the message, the wrapped VM utilizes this Warp package to perform the following steps:
```

> Avalanache Warp Messages are verified within the context of a specific P-Chain height included in the [ProposerVM](../../proposervm/README.md)'s header. The P-Chain height is provided as context to the wrapped VM when verifying the VM's internal blocks (implemented by the optional interface [WithVerifyContext](../../../snow/engine/snowman/block/block_context_vm.go)).

Reviewer 3: Wrapped is probably correct when talking about it from a code perspective but maybe underlying is more clear to people who aren't as technical
```suggestion
Avalanache Warp Messages are verified within the context of a specific P-Chain height included in the [ProposerVM](../../proposervm/README.md)'s header. The P-Chain height is provided as context to the underlying VM when verifying the underlying VM's blocks (implemented by the optional interface [WithVerifyContext](../../../snow/engine/snowman/block/block_context_vm.go)).
```

1. Lookup the canonical validator set of the Subnet sending the message at the P-Chain height

> 2. Filter the canonical validator set to only the validators claimed by the BitSetSignature

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Filter the canonical validator set to only the validators claimed by the signature
```

> To verify the message, the wrapped VM utilizes this Warp package to perform the following steps:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To verify the message, the underlying VM utilizes this `warp` package to perform the following steps:
```

> 3. Verify the weight of the included validators meets the required threshold

Reviewer 2: We should document where/how the threshold is defined

> 3. Verify the weight of the included validators meets the required threshold (threshold defined by the receiving VM)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Verify the weight of the included validators meets the required threshold defined by the receiving VM
```

4. Aggregate the public keys of the claimed validators into a single aggregate public key
5. Verify the aggregate signature of the unsigned message against the aggregate public key

Once a message is verified, it is left to the VM to define the semantics of delivering a verified message.

## Design Considerations

### Processing Historical Avalanche Warp Messages

> Verifying an Avalanche Warp Message requires a lookup of validator sets at a specific P-Chain height. The P-Chain serves lookups by maintaining reverse diffs that can be iterated in order to re-create the validator set of any Subnet at a specific height.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Verifying an Avalanche Warp Message requires a lookup of validator sets at a specific P-Chain height. The P-Chain serves lookups maintaining validator set diffs that can be applied in-order to reconstruct the validator set of any Subnet at any height.
```

> As a chain moves forward, the number of reverse diffs that need to be computed in order to look up the validator set needed to verify an Avalanche Warp Messages increases over time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As the P-Chain grows, the number of validator set diffs that needs to be applied in order to reconstruct the validator set needed to verify an Avalanche Warp Messages increases over time.
```

> Therefore, in order to support verifying historical Avalanche Warp Messages, VMs should provide a mechanism to determine whether an Avalanche Warp Message was treated as valid or invalid within a historical block.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Therefore, in order to support verifying historical Avalanche Warp Messages, VMs should provide a mechanism to determine whether an Avalanche Warp Message was treated as valid or invalid within a historical block range.
```

Author: Why block range? Warp messages are verified within a single block as opposed to a range. Is this because we're verifying a range of historical blocks?

Going to leave this out because I think it's clearer as is.

When nodes bootstrap in the future, they bootstrap blocks that have already been marked as accepted by the network, so they can assume the block was verified by the validators of the network when it was first accepted.

> Therefore, the new bootstrapping node can assume the block was valid to determine whether an Avalanche Warp Message should be treated as valid / invalid within the execution of that block.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Therefore, the new bootstrapping node can assume the block was valid to determine whether an Avalanche Warp Message should be treated as valid/invalid within the execution of that block.
```
